.. _tutorial/import-history:

Import History
==============

OMERO.importer includes a feature to record your import history, saving
this information on the OMERO.server you are connected to. This feature
allows you to import files, and then later on review and re-import those
same files if necessary. This is especially helpful if you are queuing
and running an import at one location (for example, at work) and want to
later review the status of your running import from somewhere else (for
example, at home). You can also use this feature as record of what files
you have imported, to discover which files have failed to import so you
can retry them later.

Pre-requisites
--------------

Because the importer's history information is stored server-side, you
must first have the OMERO.tables extension working on your connected
OMERO.server, and if this feature is not installed, your importer's
History tab (along the top) will be grayed out.

Instructions for how to enable this feature can be found at the
:wiki:`OMERO.tables page <OmeroTables>`.

Using the History Feature
-------------------------

The importer History tab is divided into two general areas:

-  The left hand 'side' panel allows you to search for your imports by
   date.
-  The right hand 'main' panel displays the results of your search.

The Date Filter allows you to search for imports between a given date
range, which you can either enter manually using the YY/MM/DD format, or
by using the calendar pop-up available by pressing the down arrow
button. After you have selected a date range, hitting the 'Search'
button will display all imports between those dates.

The Quick Date area allows you to quickly find imports for some of the
more common date ranges such as 'Today', 'Yesterday', 'Last Week', etc.
The list of imports under these tables will also show you the general
status of that import with an icon: a green check mark indicates a fully
successful import, whereas a yellow alert icon indicates one or more
failed files in your imported file set. Selecting any of these import
sets will automatically populate the right hand search results table
with the files from that import session.

.. figure:: ../images/import-history.png
   :align: center
   :alt:

Re-Importing Your Images
------------------------

Once you have filtered your import set by date and populated the right
hand search results table, you can re-import any of the files displayed
by clicking on that file and clicking the 'Reimport' button at the
bottom of the window. Multi-selecting files on this list can be done
using the standard method for your operating system (most typically the
'Shift' and 'Control' keys).
