.. _rst_limitations:


Known limitations
=================

.. _limitations_scripts:

Synchronization of lib/scripts
------------------------------

As described under `OMERO.scripts <server/scripts>`_, 4.2.0 includes a
significantly improved scripting system. Several official scripts are
shipped under lib/scripts in the deployment directory. If any of your
users add their own "official scripts", they too will be stored under
lib/scripts. When we release a new OMERO version, there will be some
difficulties merging the two directories.

A github repository is now available under http://github.com/ome/scripts
which provides help for merging your lib/scripts directories. For more
information, see `"How do I make lib/scripts a git
repository?" <https://www.openmicroscopy.org/site/support/faq/omero/how-do-i-make-lib-scripts-a-git-repository>`_
in the FAQ.

Building OMERO.cpp 4.4.0 and 4.4.1 under Windows with Ice 3.4 fails.
--------------------------------------------------------------------

::

        Building with ICE_HOME=e:\Ice-3.4.2
        ...
        Compiling src\omero\sys\ParametersI.obj
        ParametersI.cpp
        E:\Ice-3.4.2\include\IceUtil/Handle.h(168) : error C2249: 'IceInternal::GCShared::__incRef' : no accessible path to private member declared in virtual base 'omero::sys::Parameters'
                E:\Ice-3.4.2\include\Ice/GCShared.h(33) : see declaration of 'IceInternal::GCShared::__incRef'
                E:\openmicroscopy\components\tools\OmeroCpp\target\omero/System.h(1815)
        : see declaration of 'omero::sys::Parameters'
                E:\Ice-3.4.2\include\IceUtil/Handle.h(162) : while compiling class template member function 'IceUtil::Handle<T>::Handle(T *)'
                with
                [
                    T=omero::sys::ParametersI
                ]scons: *** [src\omero\sys\ParametersI.obj] Error 2
                src\omero\sys\ParametersI.cpp(30) : see reference to class template instantiation 'IceUtil::Handle<T>' being compiled
                with
                [
                    T=omero::sys::ParametersI
                ]

ValueError: filedescriptor out of range in select() when increasing the number of available filehandles via 'ulimit -n'
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is a known issue in Python versions prior to 2.7.0. See :ticket:`6201` 
and Python `Issue #3392 <http://bugs.python.org/issue3392>`_ for more details.

Dv from OMX files (.hdr) files not viewable
-------------------------------------------

Some files generated by an OMX system have a pixel type of float and a
large dynamic range. While the files import into OMERO they are
currently now viewable. This fix would require deep changes to several
parts of the code and we have chosen not to make the changes yet. See
:ticket:`3256`.

Postgres 9.x defaults to 'hex' bytea\_output format
---------------------------------------------------

Newer version of Postgres default to the 'hex' as opposed to 'escape'
format for bytea\_output which OMERO uses for storing script and share
data in the DB. This causes problems with OMERO 4.3 and earlier, which
can't understand this format. OMERO 4.4 works with both formats without
problems. A workaround is available under :ref:`rst_postgresql`. See 
:ticket:`5662`.

OMERO.web 'development server' does not work under Windows XP
-------------------------------------------------------------

The development server included with OMERO.web does not work under
Windows XP. This server is included to allow you to easily evaluate and
develop the OMERO.web component. As it should not be used in a
production environment, while an inconvenience, this should not stop the
deployment of a production version of OMERO.web. See `OME forum
topic <http://www.openmicroscopy.org/community/viewtopic.php?f=5&t=640>`_

OMERO.importer and number of files to import
--------------------------------------------

It is preferable not to import more than 1000 image files in a single
import.

OMERO.importer on Ubuntu
------------------------

Under older Ubuntu installations the 'import folder' option currently
does not work.

Comment annotations and OMERO.clients
-------------------------------------

If you wish to add a large comment to an object (e.g. an Image), it is
preferable to attach a file i.e. use ``FileAnnotation``.

Not finding certain pieces of data in wildcard searches
-------------------------------------------------------

Sometimes data is missed when certain types of wildcard searches are
performed. You can find further details on :ticket:`3164`.

C++ compilation problems on Mac OS X 10.6 (Snow Leopard)
--------------------------------------------------------

Under certain circumstances building OmeroCpp on Mac OS X 10.6 (Snow
Leopard) can fail with "ld: symbol(s) not found". You can find further
details, a potential solution and make any comments on your experience
with the problem on :ticket:`3210`.

Non-LDAP user password security
-------------------------------

Encrypted login and communication, via SSL, has been available in OMERO
for some time. However, under some circumstances it is possible for
passwords to end up on the wire in the clear. Further details and status
can be found on :ticket:`3232`. Users who
have their credentials stored in LDAP and who have OMERO configured to
use their LDAP server are **not** affected by this issue.

Synchronising with LDAP
-----------------------

Enabling synchronisation of LDAP on user login will result in LDAP being
treated as the authority on both group membership and also the available
groups. Any groups defined in OMERO and not in LDAP will result in users
being removed from these groups. The groups will still exist in OMERO
but user membership will be treated as being defined by LDAP alone.

Moving data between groups
--------------------------

Prior to OMERO 4.4, users cannot move data between Groups. We encourage
users to be aware of their **working group** at all times, especially
when importing.

Import of reagents and screens
------------------------------

The import of some, complicated OME-XML files may not work with 4.2.0.
Shortly before release, we tested a file with two entire screens,
several plates, and many cross linked reagents which failed. This is a
very unlikely scenario, and we know of no files that contain this level
of data, but if you have issues getting screening data imported in the
OME-XML format, please :plone:`let us know <site/community>`.

Binary delete on Windows servers
--------------------------------

On Windows servers not all binary files corresponding to a delete may be
removed from the binary repository. See :wiki:`Delete: Binary
Data <Delete#BinaryData>` for more details.
