clients/importer.rst, before:

.. _rst_clients_importer:

########
importer
########

OMERO.importer is a standalone application that allows a user to import
proprietary image data files from a filesystem accessed from the user's
computer to a running OMERO Server. This tool uses a standard file
browser to help the user find and specify files for import into the
server and then uploads the files to an OMERO Server.

To learn more about OMERO.importer see the `OMERO.importer Getting
Started Guide <../getting-started/tutorial/importing-images>`_

.. image:: ../images/omero_importer_4_4.png

OMERO.importer uses Bio-Formats for translation of proprietary file
formats in preparation for upload to an OMERO Server.

The OMERO.importer has a detailed list of the supported `File
Formats <http://www.loci.wisc.edu/ome/formats.html>`_.

For hints and guidelines on importing various file formats, also check
out the `Format
Guide <https://trac.openmicroscopy.org.uk/omero/wiki/ImporterHowTo>`_

There is also a command line version of the importer available since
version Beta 4.0 which you can find more information about by visiting
`CLI
Importer <http://trac.openmicroscopy.org.uk/omero/wiki/ImporterCLI>`_

Commit message:

Add references for tutorial pages

clients/importer.rst, after:

.. _rst_clients_importer:

########
importer
########

OMERO.importer is a standalone application that allows a user to import
proprietary image data files from a filesystem accessed from the user's
computer to a running OMERO Server. This tool uses a standard file
browser to help the user find and specify files for import into the
server and then uploads the files to an OMERO Server.

To learn more about OMERO.importer see the :ref:`rst_tutorial_import-images`

.. image:: ../images/omero_importer_4_4.png

OMERO.importer uses Bio-Formats for translation of proprietary file
formats in preparation for upload to an OMERO Server.

The OMERO.importer has a detailed list of the supported `File
Formats <http://www.loci.wisc.edu/ome/formats.html>`_.

For hints and guidelines on importing various file formats, also check
out the :wiki:`Format Guide <ImporterHowTo>`

There is also a command line version of the importer available since
version Beta 4.0 which you can find more information about by visiting
:wiki:`CLI Importer <ImporterCLI>`
