server/postgresql.rst, before:

.. _rst_postgresql:

OMERO and PostgreSQL
====================

Contents

In order to be installed, OMERO.server requires a running PostgreSQL
instance that is configured to accept connections over TCP. The
following explains how to ensure that you have the correct PostgreSQL
version and that it is installed and configured correctly. For
Windows-specific installation instructions, first see the
:ref:`Windows <rst_install-windows>` install page.

Ensuring you have a valid PostgreSQL version
--------------------------------------------

For OMERO 4.4, PostgreSQL 8.4 or higher is required (see `"Known
limitations" <known-limitations>`_ for more information.)

You can check which version of PostgreSQL you have installed with any of
the following commands:

::

           #
           # Unix
           #
           $ createuser -V
           createuser (PostgreSQL) 9.1.4
           $ psql -V
           psql (PostgreSQL) 9.1.4
           $ createdb -V
           createdb (PostgreSQL) 9.1.4
       

8.3 and earlier
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

PostgreSQL 8.3 is missing SQL2003 window functions, required by OMERO.

PostgreSQL 8.1 is missing the functions pg\_advisory\_lock and
pg\_advisory\_unlock which may lead to infrequent exceptions on insert.

If your default PostgreSQL installation is version 8.3 or earlier, you
will need to upgrade to a more up-to-date version. We suggest the
installer from `EnterpriseDB <http://www.enterprisedb.com/>`_. Versions
8.4, 9.0 and 9.1 are known to work with OMERO 4.4.

Compatibility matrix
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Versions of PostgreSQL which are compatible with OMERO are shown in
the table below.

+------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| PostgreSQL | OMERO 4.1 | OMERO 4.2 | OMERO 4.3 | OMERO 4.4 |
+============+===========+===========+===========+===========+
| 7.4        | YES       | NO [1]_   | NO [1]_   | NO [4]_   |
+------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| 8.1        | YES       | NO [3]_   | NO [1]_   | NO [4]_   |
+------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| 8.2        | YES       | YES       | NO [3]_   | NO [4]_   |
+------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| 8.3        | YES       | YES       | YES       | NO [4]_   |
+------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| 8.4        | YES       | YES       | YES       | YES       |
+------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| 9.x        | YES [2]_  | YES [2]_  | YES [2]_  | YES       |
+------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+


.. [1]  Not suggested; see :ticket:`4902`

.. [2]  Configuration may be necessary; see :ticket:`5662`

.. [3]  Not suggested; see :ticket:`5861`

.. [4]  Unsupported; see :ticket:`7813`




Checking PostgreSQL port listening status
-----------------------------------------

You can check if PostgreSQL is listening on the default port
(``TCP/5432``) by running the following command:

::

    #
    # Unix
    #
    $ netstat -an | egrep '5432.*LISTEN'
    tcp        0      0 0.0.0.0:5432            0.0.0.0:*               LISTEN
    tcp        0      0 :::5432                 :::*                    LISTEN

    #
    # Windows
    #
    C:\> netstat -an | find "5432"

**NOTE:** The exact output of this command *will* vary. The important
thing to recognize is whether or not a process is listening on
``TCP/5432``.

If you cannot find a process listening on ``TCP/5432`` you will need to
find your ``postgresql.conf`` file and enable PostgreSQL's TCP listening
mode. The exact location of the ``postgresql.conf`` file varies between
installations. It may be helpful to locate it using the package manager
(``rpm`` or ``dpkg``) or by utilizing the ``find`` command. Usually, the
PostgreSQL data directory (which houses the ``postgresql.conf`` file, is
located under ``/var`` or ``/usr``:

::

    #
    # Unix
    #
    $ sudo find /usr -name 'postgresql.conf'
    $ sudo find /var -name 'postgresql.conf'
    /var/lib/postgresql/data/postgresql.conf

**NOTE:** The PostgreSQL data directory is usually only readable by the
user ``postgres`` so you will likely have to be ``root`` in order to
find it.

Once you have found the location of the ``postgresql.conf`` file on your
particular installation, you will need to enable TCP listening:

For PostgreSQL 8.4 and 9.x, the area of the configuration file you're
concerned about should look like this:

::

    #listen_addresses = 'localhost'         # what IP address(es) to listen on;
                                        # comma-separated list of addresses;
                                        # defaults to 'localhost', '*' = all
    #port = 5432
    max_connections = 100
    # note: increasing max_connections costs ~400 bytes of shared memory per
    # connection slot, plus lock space (see max_locks_per_transaction).  You
    # might also need to raise shared_buffers to support more connections.
    #superuser_reserved_connections = 2
    #unix_socket_directory = *
    #unix_socket_group = *
    #unix_socket_permissions = 0777         # octal
    #bonjour_name = *                      # defaults to the computer name

You can find out more about PostgreSQL client configuration on the
[http://www.postgresql.org PostgreSQL website].

PostgreSQL HBA (host based authentication)
------------------------------------------

The final piece of the PostgreSQL authentication and authorization
puzzle is the so called *host based authentication* file,
``pg_hba.conf``. OMERO.server must have permissions to connect to
databases that have been created in your PostgreSQL instance. You can
make sure that it does by examining the contents of the ``pg_hba.conf``
file itself. It's important that you have at least one line allowing
connections from the loopback address (``127.0.0.1``) as follows:

::

    # TYPE  DATABASE    USER        CIDR-ADDRESS          METHOD
    # IPv4 local connections:
    host    all         all         127.0.0.1/32          md5

**NOTE:** The other lines that are in your ``pg_hba.conf`` are important
either for PostgreSQL internal commands to work or for existing
applications you may have; *DO NOT* delete them unless you know what you
are doing.

Further Reading
---------------

-  PostgreSQL 9.1 Interactive Manual
   (`HTML <http://www.postgresql.org/docs/9.1/interactive/index.html>`_)
-  PostgreSQL 9.1 Interactive Manual (`Chapter 19: Client
   Authentication <http://www.postgresql.org/docs/9.1/interactive/client-authentication.html>`_)

Commit message:

Replace NB/note by note directive
- Add additional extlink for openmicroscopy site

server/postgresql.rst, after:

.. _rst_postgresql:

OMERO and PostgreSQL
====================

.. contents::

In order to be installed, OMERO.server requires a running PostgreSQL
instance that is configured to accept connections over TCP. The
following explains how to ensure that you have the correct PostgreSQL
version and that it is installed and configured correctly. For
Windows-specific installation instructions, first see
:ref:`rst_install-windows`.

Ensuring you have a valid PostgreSQL version
--------------------------------------------

For OMERO 4.4, PostgreSQL 8.4 or higher is required (see `"Known
limitations" <known-limitations>`_ for more information.)

You can check which version of PostgreSQL you have installed with any of
the following commands:

::

           #
           # Unix
           #
           $ createuser -V
           createuser (PostgreSQL) 9.1.4
           $ psql -V
           psql (PostgreSQL) 9.1.4
           $ createdb -V
           createdb (PostgreSQL) 9.1.4
       

8.3 and earlier
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

PostgreSQL 8.3 is missing SQL2003 window functions, required by OMERO.

PostgreSQL 8.1 is missing the functions pg\_advisory\_lock and
pg\_advisory\_unlock which may lead to infrequent exceptions on insert.

If your default PostgreSQL installation is version 8.3 or earlier, you
will need to upgrade to a more up-to-date version. We suggest the
installer from `EnterpriseDB <http://www.enterprisedb.com/>`_. Versions
8.4, 9.0 and 9.1 are known to work with OMERO 4.4.

Compatibility matrix
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Versions of PostgreSQL which are compatible with OMERO are shown in
the table below.

+------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| PostgreSQL | OMERO 4.1 | OMERO 4.2 | OMERO 4.3 | OMERO 4.4 |
+============+===========+===========+===========+===========+
| 7.4        | YES       | NO [1]_   | NO [1]_   | NO [4]_   |
+------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| 8.1        | YES       | NO [3]_   | NO [1]_   | NO [4]_   |
+------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| 8.2        | YES       | YES       | NO [3]_   | NO [4]_   |
+------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| 8.3        | YES       | YES       | YES       | NO [4]_   |
+------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| 8.4        | YES       | YES       | YES       | YES       |
+------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
| 9.x        | YES [2]_  | YES [2]_  | YES [2]_  | YES       |
+------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+


.. [1]  Not suggested; see :ticket:`4902`

.. [2]  Configuration may be necessary; see :ticket:`5662`

.. [3]  Not suggested; see :ticket:`5861`

.. [4]  Unsupported; see :ticket:`7813`




Checking PostgreSQL port listening status
-----------------------------------------

You can check if PostgreSQL is listening on the default port
(``TCP/5432``) by running the following command:

::

    #
    # Unix
    #
    $ netstat -an | egrep '5432.*LISTEN'
    tcp        0      0 0.0.0.0:5432            0.0.0.0:*               LISTEN
    tcp        0      0 :::5432                 :::*                    LISTEN

    #
    # Windows
    #
    C:\> netstat -an | find "5432"

.. note::  
	The exact output of this command *will* vary. The important
	thing to recognize is whether or not a process is listening on
	``TCP/5432``.

If you cannot find a process listening on ``TCP/5432`` you will need to
find your ``postgresql.conf`` file and enable PostgreSQL's TCP listening
mode. The exact location of the ``postgresql.conf`` file varies between
installations. It may be helpful to locate it using the package manager
(``rpm`` or ``dpkg``) or by utilizing the ``find`` command. Usually, the
PostgreSQL data directory (which houses the ``postgresql.conf`` file, is
located under ``/var`` or ``/usr``:

::

    #
    # Unix
    #
    $ sudo find /usr -name 'postgresql.conf'
    $ sudo find /var -name 'postgresql.conf'
    /var/lib/postgresql/data/postgresql.conf

.. note:: 
	The PostgreSQL data directory is usually only readable by the
	user ``postgres`` so you will likely have to be ``root`` in order to
	find it.

Once you have found the location of the ``postgresql.conf`` file on your
particular installation, you will need to enable TCP listening:

For PostgreSQL 8.4 and 9.x, the area of the configuration file you're
concerned about should look like this:

::

    #listen_addresses = 'localhost'         # what IP address(es) to listen on;
                                        # comma-separated list of addresses;
                                        # defaults to 'localhost', '*' = all
    #port = 5432
    max_connections = 100
    # note: increasing max_connections costs ~400 bytes of shared memory per
    # connection slot, plus lock space (see max_locks_per_transaction).  You
    # might also need to raise shared_buffers to support more connections.
    #superuser_reserved_connections = 2
    #unix_socket_directory = *
    #unix_socket_group = *
    #unix_socket_permissions = 0777         # octal
	#bonjour_name = *                      # defaults to the computer name

You can find out more about PostgreSQL client configuration on the
[http://www.postgresql.org PostgreSQL website].

PostgreSQL HBA (host based authentication)
------------------------------------------

The final piece of the PostgreSQL authentication and authorization
puzzle is the so called *host based authentication* file,
``pg_hba.conf``. OMERO.server must have permissions to connect to
databases that have been created in your PostgreSQL instance. You can
make sure that it does by examining the contents of the ``pg_hba.conf``
file itself. It's important that you have at least one line allowing
connections from the loopback address (``127.0.0.1``) as follows:

::

    # TYPE  DATABASE    USER        CIDR-ADDRESS          METHOD
    # IPv4 local connections:
    host    all         all         127.0.0.1/32          md5

.. note:: 
	The other lines that are in your ``pg_hba.conf`` are important
   	either for PostgreSQL internal commands to work or for existing
	applications you may have; *DO NOT* delete them unless you know what you
	are doing.

.. seealso::

	`PostgreSQL 9.1  <http://www.postgresql.org/docs/9.1/interactive/index.html>`_ 
		Interactive Documentation for PostgreSQL 9.1
		
	`Client Authentication <http://www.postgresql.org/docs/9.1/interactive/client-authentication.html>`_.
		Chapter of the PostgreSQL Documentation about Client Authentification
