server/upgrade.rst, before:

.. _rst_upgrade:

Upgrade
=======

.. contents::
	:depth: 3

The OME team is committed to providing frequent, project-wide upgrades
both with bug fixes and new functionality. We try to make the schedule
for these releases as public as possible. You may want to take a look
at the `roadmap <http://trac.openmicroscopy.org.uk/ome/roadmap>`_ for
exactly what will go into a release. We always inform our
:plone:`mailing lists <community>` of the development
status. Finally, all the products check themselves with the
:wiki:`OmeroRegistry` for update notifications on startup. If you wish
to disable this functionality you should do so now as outlined on the
:wiki:`UpgradeCheck` page.

If you encounter errors during a OMERO upgrade, database upgrade, etc.
you should retain as much log information as possible and notify the
OMERO.server team via the mailing lists available on the
:plone:`community <community>` page. More experienced users may wish to
examine the :wiki:`DbUpgrade` page for technical information about OMERO.server database upgrades and
how to troubleshoot errors themselves.

For all users, the basic worflow for upgrading your OMERO.server from
4.3.x or 4.4.0 to 4.4.1 is listed below. Please refer to each section for
additional details.

#. Perform a database backup
#. Copy binaries
#. Update your database
#. (Optional) Optimize an upgraded database
#. Merge script changes
#. Update your environment variables
#. Restart your database
#. (Optional - if something goes wrong) Restore a database backup

If you are upgrading your OMERO.server from 4.4.0 to 4.4.1, the
workflow is almost identical except the database doesn't need to be
upgraded. See the :ref:`rst_upgrade_441` section for detailed steps.


Upgrade from 4.3.x server to 4.4.1 server
-----------------------------------------

.. note:: The passwords and logins used here are examples. Please consult the :ref:`rst_troubleshooting` section for explanation.

Perform a database backup
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The first thing to do before **any** upgrade activity is to backup your
database.

::

    $ pg_dump -h localhost -U db_user -Fc -f before_upgrade.db.dump omero_database

Copy new binaries
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Before copying the new binaries, stop the existing server.

::

    $ cd OMERO.server
    $ bin/omero web stop
    $ bin/omero admin stop

Your OMERO 4.3 configuration is stored using ``config.xml`` in the
``etc/grid`` directory under your OMERO.server directory. Assuming you
have not made any file changes within your OMERO.server distribution
directory, you are safe to follow the following upgrade procedure:

::

    $ cd ..
    $ mv OMERO.server OMERO.server-old
    $ unzip OMERO.server-4.4.1-ice3x-b3035.zip
    $ cp OMERO.server-old/etc/grid/config.xml OMERO.server-4.4.1-ice3x-b3035/etc/grid

where ``ice3x`` **needs to be replaced** by the appropriate Ice version of
OMERO.server.

Update your database
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

You **must** use the same username and password you have defined during
:ref:`rst_installation`. The 4.4 upgrade script should execute in
a short time.

::

    $ cd OMERO.server-4.4.1-ice3x-b3035
    $ psql -h localhost -U db_user omero_database < sql/psql/OMERO4.4__0/OMERO4.3__0.sql
    Password for user db_user:
    ...
    ...
                               status                                
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                        +
                                                                        +
                                                                        +
     YOU HAVE SUCCESSFULLY UPGRADED YOUR DATABASE TO VERSION OMERO4.4__0+
                                                                        +
                                                                        +

    (1 row)

Optimize an upgraded database (optional)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

After you have run the upgrade script, you may want to optimize your
database which can both save disk space and speed up access times.

::

    $ psql -h localhost -U db_user omero_database -c "REINDEX DATABASE omero_database FORCE;"
    $ psql -h localhost -U db_user omero_database -c "VACUUM FULL VERBOSE ANALYZE;"

Merge script changes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If any new official scripts have been added under ``lib/scripts`` or if
you've modified any of the existing ones, then you will need to backup
your modifications. Doing this, however, is not as simple as copying the
directory over since the core developers will have also improved these
scripts. In order to facilitate saving your work, we've turned the
scripts into a Git submodule which can be found at
`<https://github.com/ome/scripts>`_. For more information on how to use Git
submodules, please consult the
:plone:`FAQ <support/faq/omero/how-do-i-make-lib-scripts-a-git-repository>`.

If you would like help merging the two repositories, please contact the
OME developers.

Update your environment variables
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Environment variables
"""""""""""""""""""""

If you changed the directory name where the 4.4.1 server code resides,
make sure to update any system environment variables. Before restarting
the server, make sure your PATH and PYTHONPATH system environment
variables are pointing to the new locations.

Changes to OMERO.web URLs
"""""""""""""""""""""""""

In order to ease deployment and avoid errors for IIS (Windows production
deployment) and Apache (notably CentOS/RHEL 5 and 6) OMERO.web now
defaults to being "mounted on ``/omero``". The new OMERO.web web server
stanzas have redirects in them with the notable exception of IIS.
Depending on your web server configuration you may need to visit your
OMERO.web instance at
`http://example.com/omero/ <http://example.com/omero/>`_.

As a result of this your web server configuration stanza generated by
the previous version of ``bin/omero web config`` has to be replaced with
the new version. To generate the relevant configuration, please run
``bin/omero web config <webserver>``, update and restart your web
server.

Restart your database
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Following a successful db upgrade, you can start the 4.4.1 server.

   ::

       $ cd OMERO.server-4.4.1-ice3x-b3035/
       $ bin/omero admin start

-  If anything goes wrong, please send the output of
   ``bin/omero admin diagnostics`` to
   ome-users@lists.openmicroscopy.org.uk.

-  Start OMERO.web with the following command:

   ::

       $ bin/omero web start

Restore a database backup
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If the upgraded database or the new server version do not work for you,
or you otherwise need to rollback to a previous database backup, you may
want to restore a database backup. To do so, create a new database,

::

    $ createdb -h localhost -U postgres -O db_user omero_from_backup

restore the previous archive into this new database,

::

    $ pg_restore -Fc -d omero_from_backup before_upgrade.db.dump

and configure your server to use it.

::

    $ bin/omero config omero.db.name omero_from_backup

.. raw:: html

   <p>

 

.. raw:: html

   </p>

.. _rst_upgrade_441:

Upgrade from 4.4.0 server to 4.4.1 server
-----------------------------------------

.. note::

    This section only concerns users who upgraded to 4.4.0
    server. The 4.4.1 version is only necessary if you are having
    trouble with big images (SVS, etc) or Flex file types. If not, you
    may continue using your 4.4.0 clients and servers. See issues
    :ticket:`9372` and :ticket:`9377` for more information.

.. note::

    The passwords and logins used here are exemplary. Please
    consult the :ref:`troubleshooting_password` page
    for explanation.

Copy new binaries
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Before copying the new binaries, stop the existing server.

::

    $ cd OMERO.server
    $ bin/omero web stop
    $ bin/omero admin stop

Your OMERO 4.4.0 configuration is stored using ``config.xml`` in the
``etc/grid`` directory under your OMERO.server directory. Assuming you
have not made any file changes within your OMERO.server distribution
directory, you are safe to follow the following upgrade procedure:

::

    $ cd ..
    $ mv OMERO.server OMERO.server-old
    $ unzip OMERO.server-4.4.1-ice3x-b3035.zip
    $ cp OMERO.server-old/etc/grid/config.xml OMERO.server-4.4.1-ice3x-b3035/etc/grid

where ``ice3x`` **needs to replaced** by the adequate Ice version of
OMERO.server.

Merge script changes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As with the migration from 4.3.x, if you upgraded your scripts for
4.4.0, you'll need to do the same for 4.4.1. See the instructions above
for more information.

Restart your server
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  You can start the 4.4.1 server.

   ::

       $ cd OMERO.server-4.4.1-ice3x-b3035/
       $ bin/omero admin start

-  If anything goes wrong, please send the output of
   ``bin/omero admin diagnostics`` to
   ome-users@lists.openmicroscopy.org.uk.

-  Start OMERO.web with the following command:

   ::

       $ bin/omero web start

.. seealso::
    
    :ref:`rst_legacy_upgrade`
        Upgrade instructions for previous versions of the OMERO server.

Commit message:

Document need for upgrading postgresql prior to main upgrade

server/upgrade.rst, after:

.. _rst_upgrade:

Upgrade
=======

.. contents::
	:depth: 3

The OME team is committed to providing frequent, project-wide upgrades
both with bug fixes and new functionality. We try to make the schedule
for these releases as public as possible. You may want to take a look
at the `roadmap <http://trac.openmicroscopy.org.uk/ome/roadmap>`_ for
exactly what will go into a release. We always inform our
:plone:`mailing lists <community>` of the development
status. Finally, all the products check themselves with the
:wiki:`OmeroRegistry` for update notifications on startup. If you wish
to disable this functionality you should do so now as outlined on the
:wiki:`UpgradeCheck` page.

    **Note:** Before starting the upgrade, please ensure that you have
    obtained all the prerequisites for installation, documented for
    Unix and Windows. In particular, ensure that you are running a
    suitable version of PostgreSQL to enable successful upgrading of
    the database.

If you encounter errors during a OMERO upgrade, database upgrade, etc.
you should retain as much log information as possible and notify the
OMERO.server team via the mailing lists available on the
:plone:`community <community>` page. More experienced users may wish to
examine the :wiki:`DbUpgrade` page for technical information about OMERO.server database upgrades and
how to troubleshoot errors themselves.

For all users, the basic worflow for upgrading your OMERO.server from
4.3.x or 4.4.0 to 4.4.1 is listed below. Please refer to each section for
additional details.

#. Perform a database backup
#. Copy binaries
#. Update your database
#. (Optional) Optimize an upgraded database
#. Merge script changes
#. Update your environment variables
#. Restart your database
#. (Optional - if something goes wrong) Restore a database backup

If you are upgrading your OMERO.server from 4.4.0 to 4.4.1, the
workflow is almost identical except the database doesn't need to be
upgraded. See the :ref:`rst_upgrade_441` section for detailed steps.


Upgrade from 4.3.x server to 4.4.1 server
-----------------------------------------

.. note:: The passwords and logins used here are examples. Please consult the :ref:`rst_troubleshooting` section for explanation.

Perform a database backup
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The first thing to do before **any** upgrade activity is to backup your
database.

::

    $ pg_dump -h localhost -U db_user -Fc -f before_upgrade.db.dump omero_database

Copy new binaries
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Before copying the new binaries, stop the existing server.

::

    $ cd OMERO.server
    $ bin/omero web stop
    $ bin/omero admin stop

Your OMERO 4.3 configuration is stored using ``config.xml`` in the
``etc/grid`` directory under your OMERO.server directory. Assuming you
have not made any file changes within your OMERO.server distribution
directory, you are safe to follow the following upgrade procedure:

::

    $ cd ..
    $ mv OMERO.server OMERO.server-old
    $ unzip OMERO.server-4.4.1-ice3x-b3035.zip
    $ cp OMERO.server-old/etc/grid/config.xml OMERO.server-4.4.1-ice3x-b3035/etc/grid

where ``ice3x`` **needs to be replaced** by the appropriate Ice version of
OMERO.server.

Update your database
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

You **must** use the same username and password you have defined during
:ref:`rst_installation`. The 4.4 upgrade script should execute in
a short time.

::

    $ cd OMERO.server-4.4.1-ice3x-b3035
    $ psql -h localhost -U db_user omero_database < sql/psql/OMERO4.4__0/OMERO4.3__0.sql
    Password for user db_user:
    ...
    ...
                               status                                
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                        +
                                                                        +
                                                                        +
     YOU HAVE SUCCESSFULLY UPGRADED YOUR DATABASE TO VERSION OMERO4.4__0+
                                                                        +
                                                                        +

    (1 row)

Optimize an upgraded database (optional)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

After you have run the upgrade script, you may want to optimize your
database which can both save disk space and speed up access times.

::

    $ psql -h localhost -U db_user omero_database -c "REINDEX DATABASE omero_database FORCE;"
    $ psql -h localhost -U db_user omero_database -c "VACUUM FULL VERBOSE ANALYZE;"

Merge script changes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If any new official scripts have been added under ``lib/scripts`` or if
you've modified any of the existing ones, then you will need to backup
your modifications. Doing this, however, is not as simple as copying the
directory over since the core developers will have also improved these
scripts. In order to facilitate saving your work, we've turned the
scripts into a Git submodule which can be found at
`<https://github.com/ome/scripts>`_. For more information on how to use Git
submodules, please consult the
:plone:`FAQ <support/faq/omero/how-do-i-make-lib-scripts-a-git-repository>`.

If you would like help merging the two repositories, please contact the
OME developers.

Update your environment variables
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Environment variables
"""""""""""""""""""""

If you changed the directory name where the 4.4.1 server code resides,
make sure to update any system environment variables. Before restarting
the server, make sure your PATH and PYTHONPATH system environment
variables are pointing to the new locations.

Changes to OMERO.web URLs
"""""""""""""""""""""""""

In order to ease deployment and avoid errors for IIS (Windows production
deployment) and Apache (notably CentOS/RHEL 5 and 6) OMERO.web now
defaults to being "mounted on ``/omero``". The new OMERO.web web server
stanzas have redirects in them with the notable exception of IIS.
Depending on your web server configuration you may need to visit your
OMERO.web instance at
`http://example.com/omero/ <http://example.com/omero/>`_.

As a result of this your web server configuration stanza generated by
the previous version of ``bin/omero web config`` has to be replaced with
the new version. To generate the relevant configuration, please run
``bin/omero web config <webserver>``, update and restart your web
server.

Restart your database
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Following a successful db upgrade, you can start the 4.4.1 server.

   ::

       $ cd OMERO.server-4.4.1-ice3x-b3035/
       $ bin/omero admin start

-  If anything goes wrong, please send the output of
   ``bin/omero admin diagnostics`` to
   ome-users@lists.openmicroscopy.org.uk.

-  Start OMERO.web with the following command:

   ::

       $ bin/omero web start

Restore a database backup
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If the upgraded database or the new server version do not work for you,
or you otherwise need to rollback to a previous database backup, you may
want to restore a database backup. To do so, create a new database,

::

    $ createdb -h localhost -U postgres -O db_user omero_from_backup

restore the previous archive into this new database,

::

    $ pg_restore -Fc -d omero_from_backup before_upgrade.db.dump

and configure your server to use it.

::

    $ bin/omero config omero.db.name omero_from_backup

.. raw:: html

   <p>

 

.. raw:: html

   </p>

.. _rst_upgrade_441:

Upgrade from 4.4.0 server to 4.4.1 server
-----------------------------------------

.. note::

    This section only concerns users who upgraded to 4.4.0
    server. The 4.4.1 version is only necessary if you are having
    trouble with big images (SVS, etc) or Flex file types. If not, you
    may continue using your 4.4.0 clients and servers. See issues
    :ticket:`9372` and :ticket:`9377` for more information.

.. note::

    The passwords and logins used here are exemplary. Please
    consult the :ref:`troubleshooting_password` page
    for explanation.

Copy new binaries
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Before copying the new binaries, stop the existing server.

::

    $ cd OMERO.server
    $ bin/omero web stop
    $ bin/omero admin stop

Your OMERO 4.4.0 configuration is stored using ``config.xml`` in the
``etc/grid`` directory under your OMERO.server directory. Assuming you
have not made any file changes within your OMERO.server distribution
directory, you are safe to follow the following upgrade procedure:

::

    $ cd ..
    $ mv OMERO.server OMERO.server-old
    $ unzip OMERO.server-4.4.1-ice3x-b3035.zip
    $ cp OMERO.server-old/etc/grid/config.xml OMERO.server-4.4.1-ice3x-b3035/etc/grid

where ``ice3x`` **needs to replaced** by the adequate Ice version of
OMERO.server.

Merge script changes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As with the migration from 4.3.x, if you upgraded your scripts for
4.4.0, you'll need to do the same for 4.4.1. See the instructions above
for more information.

Restart your server
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  You can start the 4.4.1 server.

   ::

       $ cd OMERO.server-4.4.1-ice3x-b3035/
       $ bin/omero admin start

-  If anything goes wrong, please send the output of
   ``bin/omero admin diagnostics`` to
   ome-users@lists.openmicroscopy.org.uk.

-  Start OMERO.web with the following command:

   ::

       $ bin/omero web start

.. seealso::
    
    :ref:`rst_legacy_upgrade`
        Upgrade instructions for previous versions of the OMERO server.
