training/gettingyourdataout.rst, before:

Getting Your Data Out of OMERO 


Overview

   This page describes how to export, save, and publish any image files that you have stored in OMERO. 

[NOTE - YOU TEND TO ALTERNATE SOME SUB-HEADINGS WITH CAPITALS FOR ALL FIRST LETTERS AND OTHERS ALL LOWER CASE. MAKE SURE YOU KEEP THIS CONSISTENT.]

Export to OME-TIFF
 
The OMERO.insight client has the option to export your full image stack and associated metadata in OME-TIFF file format. This is available for all images on the OMERO server. In the metadata panel on the right hand side, click on the export icon. This will open the Export dialogue box where you should specify the filename and location you wish to save the image to.

(A joint screenshot showing the selection of the download and then the output of the saved image)

Export a Report
By selecting a dataset, it is possible to generate a report about this dataset. [**SCOTT, THIS DOES NOT INCLUDE ENOUGH DETAIL OF HOW TO SELECT A DATASET OR HOW TO EXPORT THE REPORT. IS THERE A HISTORICAL REASON WHY THIS ICON IS ON THE MIDDLE PANEL, WHEN ALL OF THE TAGS ARE ON THE RIGHT HAND PANEL? ALSO THIS MAKES ME AGAIN THINK THAT THE ENTIRE DOCUMENT WOULD BENEFIT FROM A REFERENCE FIGURE WITH ALL ICONS LABELLED**] This exports an excel spreadsheet containing both a summary of all the Tags associated with the images in this dataset and thumbnails of all images.

(A joint screenshot showing the selection of the report and then the output to excel)


Export Thumbnails

(I would like to check/discuss this option - OK)


Save the Image Rendering Settings

In the image viewer there is an icon which allows you to save the rendering to disk as an image file. Images can be saved for the Image, Split and Projection view modes. [I'M NOT SURE EXACTLY WHAT YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT HERE. IT IS NOT CLEAR ENOUGH, AND I AM NOT SURE THAT IT IS A LOGICAL PLACE FOR THIS TO BE INCLUDED. PERHAPS ALL THE RENDERING DETAILS SHOULD BE IN THE SECTION ON VIEWING YOUR DATA? OR MAYBE YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT SOMETHING ELSE AND I'M NOT GETTING IT]

(A joint screenshot showing the selection of the save and then the output of the saved image files)



Publishing Options
In the metadata browser panel found on the right hand side, locate the  icon [ARE YOU INTENTIONALLY LEAVING A SPACE AS YOU INTEND TO ADD A PICTURE OF THE ICON BEFORE THE WORD ICON?]. Clicking on this icon will reveal a drop-down menu of publishing tools as shown below.

(Screenshot - showing drop down menu with the possible options and then the 4 subsequent figure outputs)

Make Movie - Select this to create a movie from your multi-dimensional image data. You can specify the ranges of Z and T frames to use. You can choose whether to display a scale bar and/or any labels.

Split View Figure - Choose one or more images to be arranged in a split-channel view figure with one image per row. When making the figure, for each image you can select which channels should be shown individually and which are included in the merged panel for that row.

[BE CAREFUL OF INTERCHANGEABLY USING FIGURE & IMAGE - I'VE ALSO ADDED PANEL HERE TO TRY AND HELP - IT CAN EASILY BECOME VERY CONFUSING]

ROI Split Figure - If a rectangle ROI has been defined for an image (or images), then you can create a figure that displays the ROI as a larger panel to the right of the main image, zoomed by a chosen factor. The zoomed ROI can be split into selected channels, as for the split-view figure. Images can be labeled with their name, the name of their dataset(s) or associated tags.

Thumbnail Figure - This creates a figure of thumbnails, either using the currently selected images or all of the images in a dataset. The date range of the images is displayed on the figure, and it is also possible to choose a list of tags to sort the images by.

Movie Figure? [I THINK YOU HAVE TO COVER ALL OPTIONS THAT APPEAR IN INSIGHT AS WE PREVIOUSLY DISCUSSED]

Commit message:

updated files in training with the image names, used in training screenshots. There are still some images to complete for the data manager and ROI sections.

training/gettingyourdataout.rst, after:

Getting Your Data Out of OMERO 


Overview

   The ability to export the data from OMERO has already been shown in the sections of the image viewer and data manager with the options of exporting to OME-TIFF, export a tag report, save the displayed thumbnails, and saving an image. This section now focuses specifically on the publishing options of OMERO for producing figures. The publishing tools allow you to export images as figures, based on their annotations, metadata, ROIs etc. All figures are saved as attachments to the appropriate Project, Dataset or Image, and are also available to download. A figure legend is generated for each figure (downloaded as text file) which contains additional details for each image, such as name, ID, scale bar size, rendering settings, projected planes, pixel size, etc

[NOTE - YOU TEND TO ALTERNATE SOME SUB-HEADINGS WITH CAPITALS FOR ALL FIRST LETTERS AND OTHERS ALL LOWER CASE. MAKE SURE YOU KEEP THIS CONSISTENT.]



Publishing Options
In the metadata browser panel found on the right hand side, locate the icon. Clicking on this icon will reveal a drop-down menu of publishing tools as shown below.
.

.. image:: training_screenshots/gettingyourdataout_1.tif

Make Movie - Select this to create a movie from your multi-dimensional image data. You can specify the ranges of Z and T frames to use. You can choose whether to display a scale bar and/or any labels.

Split View Figure - Choose one or more images to be arranged in a split-channel view figure with one image per row. When making the figure, for each image you can select which channels should be shown individually and which are included in the merged panel for that row.

[BE CAREFUL OF INTERCHANGEABLY USING FIGURE & IMAGE - I'VE ALSO ADDED PANEL HERE TO TRY AND HELP - IT CAN EASILY BECOME VERY CONFUSING. 
[I need to ensure that when I say figure I mean a figure created by OMERO of the chosen images. A figure is not equal to an image in this instance.]

ROI Split Figure - If a rectangle ROI has been defined for an image (or images), then you can create a figure that displays the ROI as a larger panel to the right of the main image, zoomed by a chosen factor. The zoomed ROI can be split into selected channels, as for the split-view figure. Images can be labeled with their name, the name of their dataset(s) or associated tags.

Thumbnail Figure - This creates a figure of thumbnails, either using the currently selected images or all of the images in a dataset. The date range of the images is displayed on the figure, and it is also possible to choose a list of tags to sort the images by.

Movie Figure -  This produces a figure of a movie, showing panels of different frames it then saves the figure as a jpg or png attached to the first image in the figure.

.. image:: training_screenshots/gettingyourdataout_2.tif
