training/viewingyourdata.rst, before:

Viewing Your Data 


Overview

   This page describes the Image Viewer in OMERO.

[INCLUDE A BIT OR OF AN INTRODUCTION THAT THERE ARE A VARIETY OF WAYS THAT YOU CAN VIEW YOUR DATA. AS PREVIOUSLY DISCUSSED, VIA THE THUMBNAIL PANEL FOR AN OVERVIEW, VIA THE PREVIEW OPTION IN THE RIGHT HAVE PANEL OR THE MAIN WAY, VIA THE IMAGE VIEWER...]

The Image Viewer

The image viewer includes more functionality to explore your images. To launch the image viewer, double click on an image in the workspace panel. This will bring up the image viewer window shown below. 
It is possible to have more than one image viewer open at once simply double click on a different image in the workspace panel.

The Image Viewer Toolbar

The image viewer contains a toolbar which allows control over various advanced features. An overview of the tool bar is shown below.

(A screenshot with arrows describing each icon along the toolbar - I HOPE THIS WILL BE FAIRLY EXPLICIT ABOUT WHAT THESE DO FOR THE MOST PART, WHERE POSSIBLE AT LEAST)


Image Tab

There are three main viewing modes to examine an image. These are selected by using the three tabs found on the top of the viewer. The default view is the image tab. When your image has more than one channel, you will also see a Split tab. 
If your image has multiple planes in a Z stack, you will also see a Projection tab.

images/omero-insight-importer-iconlocation.png  (A screenshot - screenshot labelled with all of the above points on the image viewer covering channel, toggle colour, set channel colours, animate toggling, z and t slider)



Split tab

By clicking on the Split tab in the image viewer, you will see separate panels for each of the different channels in your image as well as a merge version of all channels.
This is useful to allow direct comparison of channels whilst navigating the Z and T sections. You can turn off and on the display of individual channels as required by clicking on that colour box on the left hand side of the image.

(A screenshot - Image in the split view.) 


Projection Tab 

By clicking on the Projection tab in the image viewer, the projection viewer is revealed as shown below.
The projection viewer allows you to produce maximum or mean intensity projections of the images in your stack. The top part of the projection menu controls the what and how of the projection.

(A screenshot - a combined screenshot covering the steps to produce a projection)

Commit message:

updated files in training with the image names, used in training screenshots. There are still some images to complete for the data manager and ROI sections.

training/viewingyourdata.rst, after:

Viewing Your Data 


Overview

   This page describes the Image Viewer in OMERO.

The images in OMERO as previously demonstrated in the data manager section are viewable from the thumbnail view, alternatively, via the preview panel in the right hand panel. This section now looks at the central way of viewing your images in OMERO through the image viewer. 


The Image Viewer

The image viewer includes more functionality to explore your images. To launch the image viewer, double click on an image in the workspace panel. This will bring up the image viewer window shown below. 
It is possible to have more than one image viewer open at once simply double click on a different image in the workspace panel.

The Image Viewer Toolbar

The image viewer contains a toolbar which allows control over various advanced features. An overview of the tool bar is shown below.

(A screenshot with arrows describing each icon along the toolbar - I HOPE THIS WILL BE FAIRLY EXPLICIT ABOUT WHAT THESE DO FOR THE MOST PART, WHERE POSSIBLE AT LEAST - I will change the layout of this screenshot so that is uses numbering for each icon as there is too much information to be labelled.)
.. image:: training_screenshots/viewingyourdata_1.tif

Image Tab

There are three main viewing modes to examine an image. These are selected by using the three tabs found on the top of the viewer. The default view is the image tab. When your image has more than one channel, you will also see a Split tab. 
If your image has multiple planes in a Z stack, you will also see a Projection tab.

.. image:: training_screenshots/viewingyourdata_1.tif
 (A screenshot - screenshot labelled with all of the above points on the image viewer covering channel, toggle colour, set channel colours, animate toggling, z and t slider)



Split Tab

By clicking on the Split tab in the image viewer, you will see separate panels for each of the different channels in your image as well as a merge version of all channels.This is useful to allow direct comparison of channels whilst navigating the Z and T sections. You can turn off and on the display of individual channels as required by clicking on that colour box on the left hand side of the image.

.. image:: training_screenshots/viewingyourdata_2.tif
   (NOTE FOR SCREENSHOT: I will revert back to the full view of the viewer in each of the split tab and projection view.)

Projection Tab 

By clicking on the Projection tab in the image viewer, the projection viewer is revealed as shown below.
The projection viewer allows you to produce maximum or mean intensity projections of the images in your stack. The top part of the projection menu controls the what and how of the projection.

.. image:: training_screenshots/viewingyourdata_3.tif
.. image:: training_screenshots/viewingyourdata_4.tif
