developers/Omero/Grid.rst, before:

.. _developers/Omero/Grid:

OMERO Grid
==========

To unify the various components of OMERO,
|OmeroGrid| was developed to monitor and control
processes over numerous remote systems. Based on
` ZeroC's <http://zeroc.com>`_ IceGrid framework,
|OmeroGrid| provides an administration gui,
distributed background processing, log handling, and several other
features.

.. contents::

Deployment descriptors
----------------------

All the resources for a single OMERO site are described by one
**application descriptor**. OMERO ships with several example descriptors
under :source:`etc/grid` . These
descriptors describe what processes will be started on what nodes,
identified by simple names. For example the default descriptor, used if
no other file is specified, defines three node -- "master", "node1",
"node2". As you'll see, these files are critical both for the correct
functioning of your server as well as its security.

Getting started
---------------

First it is necessary to get a binary distribution. The best way to do
this is to download the latest released version from
`MilestoneDownloads </ome/wiki/MilestoneDownloads>`_. Note: for
|OmeroGrid| functionality you will need at least
a 3.0-Beta3 server. Alternatively you can build one yourself
(`OmeroContributing </ome/wiki/OmeroContributing>`_) or download the
latest build from hudson
(` http://hudson.openmicroscopy.org.uk/job/OMERO/lastSuccessfulBuild/ <http://hudson.openmicroscopy.org.uk/job/OMERO/lastSuccessfulBuild/>`_).

**More information on installing |OmeroGrid| is
available under :ref:`developers/Server/Grid/Install`.**

::

      #
      # Enter the distribution directory. dist/ if built from source, or omero-3.0-Beta3* if downloaded.
      #
      cd dist 

      #
      # Copy your local.properties to the dist or run setup
      #
      cp ../etc/local.properties etc

      #
      # Start the master node
      #
      bin/omero admin start

      #
      # Install the application
      # Add the "debug" target (discussed below) if you want to connect via Eclipse
      #
      bin/omero admin deploy etc/grid/default.xml 

      # Use server

      #
      # Start nodes on the same or another box
      #
      bin/omero node node1 start
      bin/omero node node2 start

      #
      # Stop the application and all nodes.
      #
      bin/omero admin stop

Currently, ``bin/omero`` does not provide facilities to undeploy or
update a deployed application. However, using:

::

      bin/omero admin ice

you have full access to the ``icegridadmin``. See ` 39.21 Administrative
Utilities <http://www.zeroc.com/doc/Ice-3.2.1/manual/IceGrid.40.21.html#80724>`_
in the !ZeroC manual for more information.

How it works
------------

` IceGrid <http://zeroc.com>`_ is a location and activation service,
which functions as a central registry to manage all your OMERO server
processes. |OmeroGrid| provides server components
which use the registry to communicate with one another. Other than a
minimal amount of configuration and starting a single daemon on each
host machine, |OmeroGrid| manages the complexity
of all your computing resources.

The deployment descriptors provided define which "servers" are started
on which "nodes". For example the
:source:`default <etc/grid/default.xml>` descriptor
configures the "master" node to start the
`OmeroBlitz </ome/wiki/OmeroBlitz>`_ server, the Glacier2 router for
firewalling, as well as a single processor "Processor0". The master node
is also configured via
:source:`master.cfg <etc/master.cfg>` to host the
registry, though this process can be started elsewhere.

The master node must be started first to provide the registry. This is
done via the ``./omero admin start`` command.

Two other nodes, then, each provide a single processor, "Processor1" and
"Processor2". These are started via TBD, at which point they connect to
the registry to announce their presence. Now, jobs can be run on any of
the 3 processors. If a node with the same name is already started, then
registration will fail, which is important to prevent unauthorized
users.

The configuration of your grid, however, is very much up to you. Based
on the example descriptor files (\*.xml) and configuration files
(\*.cfg), it is possible to develop |OmeroGrid|
installations completely tailored to your computing resources.

The whole grid can be shutdown by stopping the master node via:
``./omero admin stop``. Each individual node can also be shutdown via:
``./omero node stop`` on that particular node.

Adding a processor
------------------

The most common change that you will want to make to your application
descriptor is to add another processor. Take a look at :source:`etc/grid/default.xml`.
There are two nodes which are defined: **node1** and **node2**. To add
another processing node, simply copy the node element:

::

      <node name="node1">
        <server-instance template="ProcessorTemplate" index="1"/>
      </node>

and change the node name and the index number.

::

      <node name="MyNewNode">
        <server-instance template="ProcessorTemplate" index="3"/>
      </node>

The node name and the index number do not need to match. In fact, the
index number can be completely ignored, except for the fact that it must
be unique. The node name, however, is important for properly starting
your new processor.

You'll need both a configuration file under ``etc/`` with the same name,
and unless the node name matches the name of your local host, you'll
need to specify it on the command line:

::

       bin/omero node MyNewNode start

or with the environment variable ``OMERO_NODE``:

::

       OMERO_NODE=MyNewNode bin/omero node start

For the `milestone:3.0-Beta3 </ome/milestone/3.0-Beta3>`_, the single
node which is executing beside `OmeroBlitz </ome/wiki/OmeroBlitz>`_ on
the master will probably suffice for your processing needs. In the
following milestones, the number and location of processors and nodes in
general will become increasingly important.

Running a script
----------------

Once at least a single processor is running, it is possible to execute
python scripts on the grid. After starting python with

::

      PYTHONPATH=lib ICE_CONFIG=etc/ice.config,etc/local.properties python

execute something like the following:

::

        import omero
        c = omero.client()
        sf = c.createSession()

        // Obtain your script file

        job = omero.model.ScriptJobI()
        job.linkOriginalFile( file )

        proc = sf.acquireProcessor(job, 10) # Wait no more than 10 seconds for a processor
        if proc:
            process = proc.execute(None)
            if process:
                process.wait()
                results = proc.getResults(process)

Uploading secure scripts
------------------------

This requires, however, that a script already be present. The IScript
service provides simple upload facilities. The uploaded script, however,
must currently belong to root in order to be executable. This is
critical for the security of your grid. System administrators should
carefully check all scripts and their origins before uploading them as
root. Once on the grid, **they have full access to the user account on
the remote host**.

Secure descriptors
------------------

More than just making sure no malicious code enters your grid, it is
critical to prevent unauthorized access via the application descriptors
(\*.xml) and configuration (\*.cfg) as mentioned above.

Firewall
~~~~~~~~

The simplest and most effective way of preventing unauthorized access is
to have all |OmeroGrid| resources behind a
firewall. Only the Glacier2 router has a port visible to machines
outside the firewall. If this is possible in your configuration, then
you can leave the internal endpoints unsecured.

SSL
~~~

Though it's probably unnecessary to use transport encryption within a
firewall, encryption from clients to the Glacier2 router will often be
necessary. For the `milestone:3.0-Beta3 </ome/milestone/3.0-Beta3>`_
reelase, no example SSL configuration is provided, but see ` Section
42.3
IceSSL <http://www.zeroc.com/doc/Ice-3.2.1/manual/IceSSL.43.3.html#63966>`_
of the Ice manual for more information. Once your server is properly
configured the client configuration amounts to changing:

::

    Ice.Default.Router=OMERO.Glacier2/router:tcp -p 4063 -h 127.0.0.1

to

::

    Ice.Default.Router=OMERO.Glacier2/router:ssl -p 4064 -h 127.0.0.1

in :source:`etc/ice.config`.

Permissions Verifier
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The IceSSL plugin can be used both for encrypting the channel as well as
authenticating users. SSL-based authentication, however, can be
difficult to configure especially for within the firewall, and so
instead you may want to configure a "permissions verifier" to prevent
non-trusted users from accessing a system within your firewall. From
:source:`etc/master.cfg`:

::

    IceGrid.Registry.AdminPermissionsVerifier=IceGrid/NullPermissionsVerifier
    #IceGrid.Registry.AdminCryptPasswords=etc/passwd

Here we have defined a "null" permissions verifier which allows anyone
to connect to the registry's admin endpoints. One simple way of securing
these endpoints is to use the ``AdminCryptPasswords`` property, which
expects a passwd-formatted file at the given relative or absolute path:

::

    mrmypasswordisomero TN7CjkTVoDnb2
    msmypasswordisome   jkyZ3t9JXPRRU

where these values come from using openssl:

::

    $ openssl
    OpenSSL> passwd
    Password: 
    Verifying - Password: 
    TN7CjkTVoDnb2
    OpenSSL> 

Another possibility is to use the `OmeroBlitz </ome/wiki/OmeroBlitz>`_
permissions verifier, so that anyone with a proper OMERO account can
access the server. (We are currently looking into providing a root- or
admin-only permissions verifier for public use.)

See ` Section 39.11.2 Access
Control <http://www.zeroc.com/doc/Ice-3.2.1/manual/IceGrid.40.11.html#108430>`_
of the Ice manual for more information.

Unique node names
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Only a limited number of node names are configured in an application
descriptor. For an unauthorized user to fill a slot, they must know the
name (which **is** discoverable with the right code) and be the first to
contact the grid saying "I am 'Node029", for example. A system
administrator need only,then, be certain that all the node slots are
taken up by trusted machines and users.

It is also possible to allow "dynamic registration" in which servers are
added to the registry after the fact. In some situations this may be
quite useful, but is disabled by default. Before enabling it, be sure to
have secured your endpoints via one of the methods outlined above.

Absolute paths
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Except under Windows, the example application descriptors shippied with
OMERO, all use relative paths to make installation easier. Once you are
comfortable with configuring |OmeroGrid|, it
would most likely be safer to configure absolute paths. For example,
specifying that nodes execute under ``/usr/lib/omero`` requires that who
ever starts the node have access to that directory. Therefore, as long
as you control the boxes which can attached to your endpoints (see
`Firewall </ome/wiki/OmeroGrid#Firewall>`_ above), then you can be
relatively certain that no tampering can occur with the installed
binaries.

Technical information
---------------------

Things to look at
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  :source:`components/blitz/resources/omero/Scripts.ice`
-  :source:`components/blitz/src/omero/grid/InteractiveProcessorI.java`
-  :source:`components/tools/OmeroPy/src/omero/processor.py`
-  :source:`components/tools/OmeroPy/test/scriptstest/ping.py`

Workflow
~~~~~~~~

#. **Coder** writes Script, and specifies parameters in script
#. **Coder** provides **Admin** with Script
#. **Admin** uses IScript to upload that Script to the server
#. **User** uses IScript to find an appropriate Script
#. **User** acquires Processor from ServiceFactoryI.acquireProcessor by
   passing Script
#. **User** calls execute(RMap) on Processor and receives back a Process
#. **User** uses either Process.poll() or Process.wait() or
   Process.registerCallback() to wait for results
#. **User** retrieves results via Processor.getResults()

Processes
~~~~~~~~~

It's important to understand just what processes will be running on your
servers. When you run TBD, ``icegridnode`` is executed which starts a
controlling daemon. If you haven't run this before, then it essentially
does nothing except waits for your to connect and tell it what to do.

Running ``bin/install`` installs the ``etc/grid/default.xml``
"application" into the grid, the configuration of which is persisted
under var/master and var/registry so that on subsequent starts it is not
necessary to run ``bin/install`` again.

Once the application is loaded, the ``icegridnode`` daemon process
starts up all the servers which are configured in the descriptor. If one
of the processes fails, it will be restarted. If restart fails,
eventually the server will be "disabled". On shutdown, the icegridnode
process also shutdowns all the server processes.

Targets
~~~~~~~

In application descriptors, it is possible to surround sections of the
description with ``<target/>`` elements. For example, in
``etc/grid/default.xml`` the section which defines the main
`OmeroBlitz </ome/wiki/OmeroBlitz>`_ server includes:

::

          <server id="Blitz-${index}" exe="${exe}" activation="always">
            <target name="debug">
              <option>-Xdebug</option>
              <option>-Xrunjdwp:server=y,transport=dt_socket,address=${port},suspend=n</option>
            </target>

When the application is deployed, if "debug" is added as a target, then
the ``-Xdebug``, etc. options will be passed to the Java runtime. This
will allow remote connection to your server over the configured port.

Multiple targets can be enabled at the same time:

::

      bin/omero admin deploy etc/grid/default.xml debug secure someothertarget

``Ice.MessageSizeMax``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Ice imposes an upper limit on all method invocations. This limit,
``Ice.MessageSizeMax``, is configured in your application descriptor
(e.g. :source:`templates.xml <etc/grid/templates.xml>`)
and configuration files (e.g.
:source:`ice.config <etc/ice.config>`). The setting must
be applied to all servers which will be handling the invocation. For
example, a call to ``InteractiveProcessor.execute(omero::RMap inputs)``
which passes the inputs all the way down to **processor.py** will need
to have a sufficiently large ``Ice.MessageSizeMax`` for: the client, the
Glacier2 router, the `OmeroBlitz </ome/wiki/OmeroBlitz>`_ server, and
the Processor.

The default is currently set to 4096 kilobytes, or about 4 megs.

Logging
~~~~~~~

Currently all logging output from |OmeroGrid| are
stored in ``$OMERO_HOME/var/log/master.out`` with error messages going
to ``...log/master.err``. This is sub-optimal, but will hopefully be
improved in future versions. (See ` this
thread <http://www.zeroc.com/forums/help-center/3588-logging-java-process-icegrid.html>`_
on the ZeroC forums for more information.)

Topics to be discussed
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  User-mapping, see ` 39.22 server
   activation <http://www.zeroc.com/doc/Ice-3.2.1/manual/IceGrid.40.22.html#106613>`_
-  ``IceGridAdmin console``

--------------

.. note:: 
    In the `milestone:3.0-Beta3 </ome/milestone/3.0-Beta3>`_ release,
    JBoss is not under the control of |OmeroGrid|.
    Instead, it must be started separately via $JBOSS\_HOME/bin/run.sh

.. seealso:: |OmeroSessions|, :ref:`developers/Server/Grid/Install`

Commit message:

Fix Omero/Web/* and Omero/Server/Aop links

developers/Omero/Grid.rst, after:

.. _developers/Omero/Grid:

OMERO Grid
==========

To unify the various components of OMERO,
|OmeroGrid| was developed to monitor and control
processes over numerous remote systems. Based on
` ZeroC's <http://zeroc.com>`_ IceGrid framework,
|OmeroGrid| provides an administration gui,
distributed background processing, log handling, and several other
features.

.. contents::

Deployment descriptors
----------------------

All the resources for a single OMERO site are described by one
**application descriptor**. OMERO ships with several example descriptors
under :source:`etc/grid` . These
descriptors describe what processes will be started on what nodes,
identified by simple names. For example the default descriptor, used if
no other file is specified, defines three node -- "master", "node1",
"node2". As you'll see, these files are critical both for the correct
functioning of your server as well as its security.

Getting started
---------------

First it is necessary to get a binary distribution. The best way to do
this is to download the latest released version from
`MilestoneDownloads </ome/wiki/MilestoneDownloads>`_. Note: for
|OmeroGrid| functionality you will need at least
a 3.0-Beta3 server. Alternatively you can build one yourself
(`OmeroContributing </ome/wiki/OmeroContributing>`_) or download the
latest build from hudson
(` http://hudson.openmicroscopy.org.uk/job/OMERO/lastSuccessfulBuild/ <http://hudson.openmicroscopy.org.uk/job/OMERO/lastSuccessfulBuild/>`_).

**More information on installing |OmeroGrid| is
available under :ref:`developers/Server/Grid/Install`.**

::

      #
      # Enter the distribution directory. dist/ if built from source, or omero-3.0-Beta3* if downloaded.
      #
      cd dist 

      #
      # Copy your local.properties to the dist or run setup
      #
      cp ../etc/local.properties etc

      #
      # Start the master node
      #
      bin/omero admin start

      #
      # Install the application
      # Add the "debug" target (discussed below) if you want to connect via Eclipse
      #
      bin/omero admin deploy etc/grid/default.xml 

      # Use server

      #
      # Start nodes on the same or another box
      #
      bin/omero node node1 start
      bin/omero node node2 start

      #
      # Stop the application and all nodes.
      #
      bin/omero admin stop

Currently, ``bin/omero`` does not provide facilities to undeploy or
update a deployed application. However, using:

::

      bin/omero admin ice

you have full access to the ``icegridadmin``. See ` 39.21 Administrative
Utilities <http://www.zeroc.com/doc/Ice-3.2.1/manual/IceGrid.40.21.html#80724>`_
in the !ZeroC manual for more information.

How it works
------------

` IceGrid <http://zeroc.com>`_ is a location and activation service,
which functions as a central registry to manage all your OMERO server
processes. |OmeroGrid| provides server components
which use the registry to communicate with one another. Other than a
minimal amount of configuration and starting a single daemon on each
host machine, |OmeroGrid| manages the complexity
of all your computing resources.

The deployment descriptors provided define which "servers" are started
on which "nodes". For example the
:source:`default <etc/grid/default.xml>` descriptor
configures the "master" node to start the
`OmeroBlitz </ome/wiki/OmeroBlitz>`_ server, the Glacier2 router for
firewalling, as well as a single processor "Processor0". The master node
is also configured via
:source:`master.cfg <etc/master.cfg>` to host the
registry, though this process can be started elsewhere.

The master node must be started first to provide the registry. This is
done via the ``./omero admin start`` command.

Two other nodes, then, each provide a single processor, "Processor1" and
"Processor2". These are started via TBD, at which point they connect to
the registry to announce their presence. Now, jobs can be run on any of
the 3 processors. If a node with the same name is already started, then
registration will fail, which is important to prevent unauthorized
users.

The configuration of your grid, however, is very much up to you. Based
on the example descriptor files (\*.xml) and configuration files
(\*.cfg), it is possible to develop |OmeroGrid|
installations completely tailored to your computing resources.

The whole grid can be shutdown by stopping the master node via:
``./omero admin stop``. Each individual node can also be shutdown via:
``./omero node stop`` on that particular node.

Adding a processor
------------------

The most common change that you will want to make to your application
descriptor is to add another processor. Take a look at :source:`etc/grid/default.xml`.
There are two nodes which are defined: **node1** and **node2**. To add
another processing node, simply copy the node element:

::

      <node name="node1">
        <server-instance template="ProcessorTemplate" index="1"/>
      </node>

and change the node name and the index number.

::

      <node name="MyNewNode">
        <server-instance template="ProcessorTemplate" index="3"/>
      </node>

The node name and the index number do not need to match. In fact, the
index number can be completely ignored, except for the fact that it must
be unique. The node name, however, is important for properly starting
your new processor.

You'll need both a configuration file under ``etc/`` with the same name,
and unless the node name matches the name of your local host, you'll
need to specify it on the command line:

::

       bin/omero node MyNewNode start

or with the environment variable ``OMERO_NODE``:

::

       OMERO_NODE=MyNewNode bin/omero node start

For the `milestone:3.0-Beta3 </ome/milestone/3.0-Beta3>`_, the single
node which is executing beside `OmeroBlitz </ome/wiki/OmeroBlitz>`_ on
the master will probably suffice for your processing needs. In the
following milestones, the number and location of processors and nodes in
general will become increasingly important.

Running a script
----------------

Once at least a single processor is running, it is possible to execute
python scripts on the grid. After starting python with

::

      PYTHONPATH=lib ICE_CONFIG=etc/ice.config,etc/local.properties python

execute something like the following:

::

        import omero
        c = omero.client()
        sf = c.createSession()

        // Obtain your script file

        job = omero.model.ScriptJobI()
        job.linkOriginalFile( file )

        proc = sf.acquireProcessor(job, 10) # Wait no more than 10 seconds for a processor
        if proc:
            process = proc.execute(None)
            if process:
                process.wait()
                results = proc.getResults(process)

Uploading secure scripts
------------------------

This requires, however, that a script already be present. The IScript
service provides simple upload facilities. The uploaded script, however,
must currently belong to root in order to be executable. This is
critical for the security of your grid. System administrators should
carefully check all scripts and their origins before uploading them as
root. Once on the grid, **they have full access to the user account on
the remote host**.

Secure descriptors
------------------

More than just making sure no malicious code enters your grid, it is
critical to prevent unauthorized access via the application descriptors
(\*.xml) and configuration (\*.cfg) as mentioned above.

.. _developers/Omero/Grid#Firewall:

Firewall
~~~~~~~~

The simplest and most effective way of preventing unauthorized access is
to have all |OmeroGrid| resources behind a
firewall. Only the Glacier2 router has a port visible to machines
outside the firewall. If this is possible in your configuration, then
you can leave the internal endpoints unsecured.

SSL
~~~

Though it's probably unnecessary to use transport encryption within a
firewall, encryption from clients to the Glacier2 router will often be
necessary. For the `milestone:3.0-Beta3 </ome/milestone/3.0-Beta3>`_
reelase, no example SSL configuration is provided, but see ` Section
42.3
IceSSL <http://www.zeroc.com/doc/Ice-3.2.1/manual/IceSSL.43.3.html#63966>`_
of the Ice manual for more information. Once your server is properly
configured the client configuration amounts to changing:

::

    Ice.Default.Router=OMERO.Glacier2/router:tcp -p 4063 -h 127.0.0.1

to

::

    Ice.Default.Router=OMERO.Glacier2/router:ssl -p 4064 -h 127.0.0.1

in :source:`etc/ice.config`.

Permissions Verifier
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The IceSSL plugin can be used both for encrypting the channel as well as
authenticating users. SSL-based authentication, however, can be
difficult to configure especially for within the firewall, and so
instead you may want to configure a "permissions verifier" to prevent
non-trusted users from accessing a system within your firewall. From
:source:`etc/master.cfg`:

::

    IceGrid.Registry.AdminPermissionsVerifier=IceGrid/NullPermissionsVerifier
    #IceGrid.Registry.AdminCryptPasswords=etc/passwd

Here we have defined a "null" permissions verifier which allows anyone
to connect to the registry's admin endpoints. One simple way of securing
these endpoints is to use the ``AdminCryptPasswords`` property, which
expects a passwd-formatted file at the given relative or absolute path:

::

    mrmypasswordisomero TN7CjkTVoDnb2
    msmypasswordisome   jkyZ3t9JXPRRU

where these values come from using openssl:

::

    $ openssl
    OpenSSL> passwd
    Password: 
    Verifying - Password: 
    TN7CjkTVoDnb2
    OpenSSL> 

Another possibility is to use the `OmeroBlitz </ome/wiki/OmeroBlitz>`_
permissions verifier, so that anyone with a proper OMERO account can
access the server. (We are currently looking into providing a root- or
admin-only permissions verifier for public use.)

See ` Section 39.11.2 Access
Control <http://www.zeroc.com/doc/Ice-3.2.1/manual/IceGrid.40.11.html#108430>`_
of the Ice manual for more information.

Unique node names
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Only a limited number of node names are configured in an application
descriptor. For an unauthorized user to fill a slot, they must know the
name (which **is** discoverable with the right code) and be the first to
contact the grid saying "I am 'Node029", for example. A system
administrator need only,then, be certain that all the node slots are
taken up by trusted machines and users.

It is also possible to allow "dynamic registration" in which servers are
added to the registry after the fact. In some situations this may be
quite useful, but is disabled by default. Before enabling it, be sure to
have secured your endpoints via one of the methods outlined above.

Absolute paths
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Except under Windows, the example application descriptors shippied with
OMERO, all use relative paths to make installation easier. Once you are
comfortable with configuring |OmeroGrid|, it
would most likely be safer to configure absolute paths. For example,
specifying that nodes execute under ``/usr/lib/omero`` requires that who
ever starts the node have access to that directory. Therefore, as long
as you control the boxes which can attached to your endpoints (see
:ref:`developers/Omero/Grid#Firewall`), then you can be
relatively certain that no tampering can occur with the installed
binaries.

Technical information
---------------------

Things to look at
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  :source:`components/blitz/resources/omero/Scripts.ice`
-  :source:`components/blitz/src/omero/grid/InteractiveProcessorI.java`
-  :source:`components/tools/OmeroPy/src/omero/processor.py`
-  :source:`components/tools/OmeroPy/test/scriptstest/ping.py`

Workflow
~~~~~~~~

#. **Coder** writes Script, and specifies parameters in script
#. **Coder** provides **Admin** with Script
#. **Admin** uses IScript to upload that Script to the server
#. **User** uses IScript to find an appropriate Script
#. **User** acquires Processor from ServiceFactoryI.acquireProcessor by
   passing Script
#. **User** calls execute(RMap) on Processor and receives back a Process
#. **User** uses either Process.poll() or Process.wait() or
   Process.registerCallback() to wait for results
#. **User** retrieves results via Processor.getResults()

Processes
~~~~~~~~~

It's important to understand just what processes will be running on your
servers. When you run TBD, ``icegridnode`` is executed which starts a
controlling daemon. If you haven't run this before, then it essentially
does nothing except waits for your to connect and tell it what to do.

Running ``bin/install`` installs the ``etc/grid/default.xml``
"application" into the grid, the configuration of which is persisted
under var/master and var/registry so that on subsequent starts it is not
necessary to run ``bin/install`` again.

Once the application is loaded, the ``icegridnode`` daemon process
starts up all the servers which are configured in the descriptor. If one
of the processes fails, it will be restarted. If restart fails,
eventually the server will be "disabled". On shutdown, the icegridnode
process also shutdowns all the server processes.

Targets
~~~~~~~

In application descriptors, it is possible to surround sections of the
description with ``<target/>`` elements. For example, in
``etc/grid/default.xml`` the section which defines the main
`OmeroBlitz </ome/wiki/OmeroBlitz>`_ server includes:

::

          <server id="Blitz-${index}" exe="${exe}" activation="always">
            <target name="debug">
              <option>-Xdebug</option>
              <option>-Xrunjdwp:server=y,transport=dt_socket,address=${port},suspend=n</option>
            </target>

When the application is deployed, if "debug" is added as a target, then
the ``-Xdebug``, etc. options will be passed to the Java runtime. This
will allow remote connection to your server over the configured port.

Multiple targets can be enabled at the same time:

::

      bin/omero admin deploy etc/grid/default.xml debug secure someothertarget

``Ice.MessageSizeMax``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Ice imposes an upper limit on all method invocations. This limit,
``Ice.MessageSizeMax``, is configured in your application descriptor
(e.g. :source:`templates.xml <etc/grid/templates.xml>`)
and configuration files (e.g.
:source:`ice.config <etc/ice.config>`). The setting must
be applied to all servers which will be handling the invocation. For
example, a call to ``InteractiveProcessor.execute(omero::RMap inputs)``
which passes the inputs all the way down to **processor.py** will need
to have a sufficiently large ``Ice.MessageSizeMax`` for: the client, the
Glacier2 router, the `OmeroBlitz </ome/wiki/OmeroBlitz>`_ server, and
the Processor.

The default is currently set to 4096 kilobytes, or about 4 megs.

Logging
~~~~~~~

Currently all logging output from |OmeroGrid| are
stored in ``$OMERO_HOME/var/log/master.out`` with error messages going
to ``...log/master.err``. This is sub-optimal, but will hopefully be
improved in future versions. (See ` this
thread <http://www.zeroc.com/forums/help-center/3588-logging-java-process-icegrid.html>`_
on the ZeroC forums for more information.)

Topics to be discussed
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-  User-mapping, see ` 39.22 server
   activation <http://www.zeroc.com/doc/Ice-3.2.1/manual/IceGrid.40.22.html#106613>`_
-  ``IceGridAdmin console``

--------------

.. note:: 
    In the `milestone:3.0-Beta3 </ome/milestone/3.0-Beta3>`_ release,
    JBoss is not under the control of |OmeroGrid|.
    Instead, it must be started separately via $JBOSS\_HOME/bin/run.sh

.. seealso:: |OmeroSessions|, :ref:`developers/Server/Grid/Install`
